---
layout: post
title:  "Home Page - 2002-06-30"
categories: [Home]
---

Post date: Nov 29, 2008 3:42:9 AM

**TJ Kolam - An Overview** [Read this article]

...*Kolam*, is a regular Tamil word (maybe other South Indian languages too might be sharing this word with minor variations). I didn't even try to translate this name into English, for this project, as Kolam is pretty unique to this part of the world. Of course, I've seen similar art forms with knots and curves in some Inca related pages in web. I guess the Arabs too have similar graphic art forms (which is evident in some great mosques that are in India). All the same, I guess, no where else in the world, is the Kolam like art form as alive and a day-to-day affair, as it is in India...

I think this symmetry part has been used extensively by the kolam creators. But, this is not enough. You need more patterns to make kolam drawing as simple as connecting points with line. If you see the above figure, I've specifically shaded the closed areas that contain the dots ('Pullie' in Tamil). This way you can see clearly that a kolam is just a connected network of many 'bubbles' (if you can call these shaded parts so). This is important because, this way you only have to join different dots creatively, and the regulation part of weaving the curve around them could be automated. This is not to say that joining dots is easy, because traditionally only certain dot-connections are considered beautiful. You are free to explore, but don't blame me, if your mom gives an indifferent glance to your masterpiece. The above are some frequent and pleasing connections of dots.

**TJ Ragam - An Overview** [Read this article] Very simply put, music that we hear, has three aspects to it. The Pitch, Volume and Timbre. *Volume* as we know is the loudness. The *Pitch* is the most important aspect of sound that makes us enjoy music. This is the granule of any melody. Another name for pitch is frequency, which is just the number of beats per second. It is measured in Hertz (Hz) which is again just the cycles per second. The *Timbre* is the quality that differentiates a song played with different instruments. There is whole lot of physics due to Helmholtz which says that Timbre is just a particular combination of pitches or frequencies. The fourth aspect that is not exactly a quality of sound, but crucial for music is the timing. How long a note (pitch) has to play, or not play, is a vital factor.

