---
layout: post
title:  "Home Page - 2002-05-26"
---

Post date: Nov 29, 2008 3:32:57 AM

**'Lead, Follow or Get out of the way!'** [Read this Article]

What can happen accidentally, can happen with deliberation too This is the realization that is the mark of a true genius. Their past has convinced them that they are capable of engineering their surrounding, for their own motivation. Of course they blunder sometime or even many times. But they will constantly try to create their own stimulating environment. They will not wait for one more luck. They understand that waiting for luck is too costly, so they create their own. This is the lesson for everybody. If the previous phase make them a god in the eyes of others, this is the phase that makes them the real smart human being, who know their limitation. For sometime they could be afraid that they might loose their audience, but soon they don't care one way or the other. Life has already become one huge game of possibilities.

**Axioms of Software Business - II** [Read this Article] What should be the initial version? Symbolically we could start with 0.1, and latter jump version if we are very ahead. This also allows a wallowing time, before the first major release. How should we increment the version numbers? First of all we should accept the version parts are independent numbers and not just decimal. Thus 1.12 could be a valid version number. But 1.1 and 1.12 could not be considered successive versions (unless jumped). This way, we can keep our unit of change constant, instead of squeezing major future changes in smaller version numbers just to get to arrive at the whole number. For example, instead of saying the future changes as 1.9, 1.99 and 1.999 (though every change is equally sized), we could as well say 1.9, 1.10, and 1.11 etc.
}
